finishes. Okay,
well, anyway, I was fortunate enough to be one of
the winners. There were three winners. Once they
had the highest grade on these exams. And the other
two winners were an individual named JW Collier.
And the other was an Hispanic, Gus Pena, P-E-N-A.
So the three of us were to go on this tour. And
Professor Mogford, the cotton expert, had been
taking the tour every time for the last several
years. I think either he or maybe it was his wife
getting tired of him being gone all summer. So they
elected Dr. Trotter to go, the head of the
department. So Dr. Trotter took the three of us on
this tour. And I'll go over it briefly. We spent
about three weeks in the United States traveling
in a car, Dr. Trotter's car. There were four of us in
the car and all our luggage. We left College
Station and went across the southeast through
Louisiana, Alabama, and so forth, stopping at
experiment stations on the way, and supposedly,
anyway, studying cotton and our other local
matters. But we got all the way over to the east
coast and then went up the east coast to... through
Virginia and then up to Washington, D.C., and
spent two or three days in Washington with some of
the federal people there interested, ran the
cotton programs, and then went up to New York for
two or three days and went to the cotton exchange, I
guess it was. There where they marketed the cotton
and visited some of the people there and generally
had a great time and we had some entertainment. I'm
sure we went to one or two shows. I guess we went to
the Rockettes at Rockefeller Center. So that was,
this was big for all of us. We, the students, we
hadn't hardly been out of the state, I guess, at
that time. Well, no, I'd been out, but not to any
extent. This, certainly never been to the East
Coast before. So it was a great occasion. The part
in this country was great. Then we got on a ship, and
it was a converted merchant ship. During the
summer, these shipping lines would refit some of
their transport ships to carry passengers during
the summer. We had about 100 people on there, and it
was all one class. And it was just great. Everybody
was friendly and there were plenty of girls on
board. There were a lot of them teachers or high
school, excuse me, college students. And they
were all all over the country. So it was, the voyage
was really quite interesting. We left New York and
landed at, What's the port in England? Liverpool.
Liverpool, yeah. I kept saying Manchester,
Birmingham. I knew when he landed at Liverpool. It
was about a 10-day trip. It was not a fast ship, as
you might expect, something like that. But it was
really an enjoyable occasion. Then we spent about
three or four weeks in England and on the continent
going around. through the cotton mills and cotton
exchanges, anything, dealing with cotton and
some entertainment off and on. Well, we got off at
Liverpool and then went to Manchester, which is
the main mill town, and to London, and went across
the English Channel from Dover to Calais. No, we
landed in Belgium. What would that have been? I
can't think of, Austin, Austin, Belgium. That was
a few hour trip, as I recall. And then went some
meals in Belgium, then to Germany. We made a trip
down the Rhine one day, which really was
informative, interesting. Did you see, the
German part of the trip, did you see any evidences
of Nazism? I want to tell you this, and it's easy to
say in retrospect, but you would have had to have
been blind, deaf, and dumb not to know that the
Nazis were getting ready for something. They were
just troops marching, not marching, just
everywhere, moving here, moving there, and this
was the summer of 1938.
Well, I paid attention to it, but I wasn't in a
position really evaluating it, but it was just,
Why in the world would they have all these troops
around if they were going to do something? And what
was next year that they marched into Poland? But
they were all busy and active and moving. And the
ships were up and down the Rhine were loaded with
coal, iron, various resources. And it sure looked
obvious that something was going to take place
there. And, yeah, there were the Browns. suited
fellows with the swastika on their sleeves one
thing that surprised me is that on this ride down
the rhine that day half the germans on there or more
seemed they could speak enough english you could
communicate with them and i remember visiting
with two or three different germans one of them was
a girl there who was i guess she was in college
somewhere but she could talk English quite well.
Mainly talked about where she was going to school,
what she was doing, something about the country.
We spent altogether two or three days there in
Germany and went down the Rhine and I believe we got
off at Mainz. I think we got on at Cologne and off at
Mainz and went into Switzerland. That wasn't much
cotton tour in Switzerland, but Switzerland's a
beautiful place to see. We went to Lake Lucerne, I
guess it was. This is all kind of amazing for...
small town people who hadn't been anywhere at age
21.
From a few days in Switzerland, we went on to France
and Paris for a few days and saw the Folies Bougier
for the first time. So this wasn't all work.
Then we went across France to tours, I believe.
And then on to Laharve. I was trying to think of the
port where we departed from. I couldn't think for
the moment, but got on the ship coming back at
Laharve. And for some reason, they mixed up our
tickets or changed their shipping schedules. And
we were given first-class accommodations on this
ship. It was a regular class ship. It was a big ship
with several hundred people, pastors on board.
And to show you how limited my background was, it
was one of the worst experiences I've ever had. I
didn't fit in. We didn't fit in with these people.
That didn't really happen. These were Most of them
wealthy people, and they had their own cliques and
their own practices, and we just felt outside of it
to some extent. Oh, it was all right, but you could
really tell the difference. You toured cotton
mills in Europe. Right. Did you tour any cotton
mills in New England? No. I don't know whether
there were any left by then. Did you tour any
American mills? Oh, yes. Now I'm recalling a
little better. I think the shift had primarily
occurred from New England mills to the southern
mills, and we went through two or three large ones
in North Carolina and Georgia in that area. Yeah, I
failed to mention that as we went through there.
How long was this whole trip? Six months? No, no,
just the summer, 10 to 12 weeks, something like
that. We left right after school was out. Let's
back up just a little now. As we're getting ready
for you to graduate, that little doodad fell off,
and it's there in the chair. No worries. No
worries. Okay, it's still recording. As you
approached commissioning and...
commencement and so forth. Do you remember those
events for you? What was commissioning and
commencement like? Well, see, I wasn't eligible
for a commission, so I wasn't involved with that. I
did take the two years required basic military
science, so I was not in on commissioning. What
about graduation? Well, we had final review. I
remember that and marched in it and graduated.
Commencement was, I believe I'm correct on this,
held in Kyle Field. I
can't remember the speaker. I don't remember who
he was. I remember I was going with Margaret then
and she was up for it and my parents and so forth.
What kind of life did you think you were getting
ready to What
do you think you were going to be doing in the next
few years? Well, when I started school at A&M, this
shows a limitation in my vision, I guess, but I was
going back to Arkansas into agriculture in some
form, shape, form, or fashion. But
at commencement, I had not... made arrangements
to get into graduate school yet, and I've
forgotten just what the status of that was. I
believe I'd initiated
some activity there during the spring to look into
the assistantship over in the Experiment
Station.
little Jocko Roberts, probably. And he was the
student on this assistantship at that time. So I
remember going over to talk to him some about it in
the spring of 38. So by commencement time, I had
some concept perhaps of continuing at A&M there in
graduate school and working in the experiment
station for at least the next step, so I wasn't
thinking too much. I had marriage on my mind more
than anything else probably right about then.
Well, it was small enough that it didn't seem to be a
big financial factor.
I
don't know that I can remember specifically, but
I've on several different occasions anywhere had
people recognize it and call attention to it and
and in my case particularly there's a lot of
interest generated in it when they see it they
begin to wonder well it's practically smooth when
that guy get out he might he ought to be gone by now i
did lose it one time here this was since we moved
back here one time a few years ago for about a month
and uh The lady that cleans up every couple of weeks
for it happened to locate it one day on the floor in a
corner somewhere. So I've been ever grateful to
her for it. Do you remember going to Aggie Muster as
an undergraduate? April 21st, Muster.
I can't recall that. Were they being held? Well,
you're confirming what I have encountered in
others. Most people don't remember musters until
after World War II. And I have the impression that
World War II made a great change in mustard and in
bonfire,
that those traditions became more
important here. And more attention given to...
Well, that... I'm groping for that muster
experience, but I can't remember it as a student or
even in graduate school right after that. Shirley
Cain. All right, let's see. Back to your student
days. There must have been a variety
of students. As far as you recall, how were
Hispanic American students treated? We had,
again, based on my memory, one Hispanic student in
our battery, and he was emulated almost. He was
treated with extreme respect and regard and was
just an outstanding individual. You may know this
family, Reyes. I would think they've had five or
six children. Children go through A&M, and what
was, I can't think of this one's first name. I can
visualize him, but he was, I think, a year behind
me, and just a wonderful person. And last year I was
here, his brother came in as a freshman, and then I
knew another, one of the brothers that worked for
the Experiment Station down in Beeville for years
and years, and was just outstanding. Did you know
any of the Japanese Americans? I can't remember
the fellow's name, but I'm sure he's recorded
somewhere in the NMN. He was probably a class of 37,
maybe. Was this Kishi from over at Orange Field?
The name didn't... What about Jewish students?
Did you know any Jewish students? You bet. Well, I
thought like I knew a hundred of them, but I knew one
that was a scream.
You know about this Japanese, I can't recall that
fellow's name. He was an outstanding student here
in the 36th, 7th, 8th, along in there. And I
remember there was discussion about him among
those of us who had known him. after the war started
and what happened to him and where he was and did he
go back to Japan and all that and I can't recall it
but he was a stellar student and well known on the
campus and I think perhaps in the core ranks
Anyway, that was the only Japanese student I
remember. Jewish students, there was a whole
flock of them from New York or New Jersey or
somewhere in the northeast going to vet school
because they didn't have any vet schools up there.
So all of them that could get in, I guess, they were
coming here. So that was one source of Jewish
students that I can't actually recall one of their
names offhand. I remember seeing them. And were
those students treated just about like everybody
else was? I think there might have been some,
not severe resentment, but they were referred to
as a group. The out-of-state ones? Yeah, the
out-of-state ones that had come down here to go to
Beth's school. What about the Jewish students
from Houston? Oh, well, I only know one of them real
well, and his name was Ike Wexler. And there was a
Wexler jewelry store in Houston, and that's where
he came from. He was one of the funniest guys.
Everything was a big joke to him. He was a heavyset
fellow, loved to eat and have a good time, and life
was just one big party to him. And I don't know
whether, I doubt if he ever graduated, but
everybody... I just liked him. I think he was in
there in our outfit I was in or the one next in the
dormitory right nearby. But I don't remember any,
certainly wasn't any significance attached to
him. In fact, he'd laugh about being a Jew. It was a
big joke. Am I correct that in that era, Where you
came from, where you worshiped or didn't worship,
your ancestry didn't matter. You were an Agate.
That was the key thing. I'd say that's a reasonable
statement.
Individuals were liked, disliked, or whatever,
based on their particular characteristics. Now,
scholars weren't especially... I don't know that
they were dishonored, but that wasn't one of the
characteristics that made a student popular or
unpopular. And I suppose there was a little
reaction to the perfect student, the one who
followed all the rules and marched just right and
was rewarded, usually with a military ranking. I
didn't touch on that much, but the military
ranking aspects of the Corps was quite
significant. You know, who was company
commander, who was the major and the lieutenant
colonel, and certainly the cadet colonel was a
tremendously important position. In terms of
status,
was the cadet colonel the highest in terms of
student status? Recognition. Was that the
highest recognition that a student could have?
That would be my recollection. Did you all even
have a student body president that you knew about?
I don't recall one. The military ranking was a life
and death matter in a way. It was the crux of the
whole Corps at that time and really the most,
rewarding position was a unit commander, or at
least that's what I've observed and been told,
that you had a company of people you were
responsible for, and you were. I mean, they took
responsibility, and of course they had a top kick,
the sergeant, the junior, and the officers of
positions, military positions above them, the
majors, these lieutenant colonels, they were
staff people, and they didn't really have They had
jurisdiction, you might say, over four
companies, but not over individuals. But the
company commander was where the real
jurisdiction came. And it affected the quality of
the organization dramatically. Because some
companies, you'd have an outstanding company
commander. The students in there would be passing
their courses. And if somebody got behind, they
got some help, either a Either physical
or metal or both. Yeah.
Okay.
You graduated, were away for a little while, and
then you came back to A&M. as a member of the staff?
No, I was just a graduate student at that time. We
finished the cotton tour right about the end of the
summer. And I was starting graduate school in
September and to start on this assistant, what
they called an assistantship at the time, in the
experiment station in the agronomy part of the
experiment station, which I At that time,
Experiment Station was a separate entity from the
college teaching part of the school and operated
more or less independently. But there were
graduate students throughout the Experiment
Station that worked there and took the courses at
the college, which it was called at that time. And
that, then World War II, and then After the war,
when do you return to A&M? Well, I came back in,
let's see, I guess it was the beginning of 46.
Do you want anything about the 38? Let's jump on to
when you joined the professional staff here.
After the war. Let's see. Well, I guess I went on the
staff in 1940, actually, when I finished my
degree, finished my master's degree in the summer
of 1940. And Dr. Mangelsdorf left at that time,
resigned from the Experiment Station and
accepted a position as professor at Harvard,
which is where he had gone for his graduate degree.
So I was a mere graduate student of 23, I think, if I
remember right, in 1940. And
he left without a whole lot of notice, and
obtaining replacements was becoming somewhat
difficult at that time. The war wasn't far away,
and there The military was already becoming
active, so I was there on hand, and I was just asked
to take over the program. This was an experiment
station, what was called the Corn Improvement
Program.
So Dr. Mangelsdorf left, and I took over the
program in 1940. a greatly underqualified member
of the staff, you could say, at that time. And I
think it was on somewhat of a temporary basis. I
remember I was paid $200 a month, though, which was
fantastic because I had married in 1938, soon
after graduate school. I mean, soon after I
graduated. And then my wife worked. most of the
time while I was in graduate school. But then I
could support the families somewhat on $200 a
month. I have one story I wanted to mention, if it's
agreeable to you, about my most embarrassing
moment that occurred. I guess this was while I was
in graduate school. I think I've told you a little
bit previously about the cotton tour and coming
back from that. And we were married on September
30th in 1938. So I was basically married the whole
time I was going to graduate school. And sometime
in the fall of 38, I still was active in the agronomy
department. And they were having an agronomy
society meeting one night. And they invited
myself and I think it was one or two others
individuals who'd been on that cotton tour,
previous ones anyway. The program was a cotton
tour. So I took my wife. There were several women,
faculty wives or so forth there at the meeting. It
was kind of a social event as well as a meeting. And I
was one of those giving a brief report of the cotton
tour, what I thought about it and appreciated it
and so forth. And I don't know. My mind must have
been out of gear at the moment anyway. I was telling
how much I appreciated the cotton to her and how
enjoyable it had been and something I'd remember
all my life. And then I looked down at my bride and
said, in fact, I enjoyed it more than anything I've
ever done. And I kind of looked at her and said,
until I got married. That brought down the house. I
still remember that. It was great. Fortunately,
they had a film they were showing, so somebody
turned off the lights like that. Kind of took the
brunt off of it, but I've always remembered that
faux pas. Anyway, you can imagine a room full of
Aggies with a combat like that. Anyway. So you were
on the staff until the war, and during the war.
Well, I started on the staff in 1940 and took over
the corn improvement project. And this was
important, not just to me, but from the standpoint
of the Experiment Station. The corn grown
throughout the United States had been bridal corn
up to that time. And of course, Texas, the South,
was behind the Midwest in the adoption of hybrid
corn. So Dr. Mangelfeld initiated the program to
start hybrid corn for Texas. had not reached
fruition. There was none being grown in 1940. But
it was right at a point where we could introduce it
and get it started. So it was a pretty important
period right then as far as development of hybrids
and the introduction into the Texas market. And
that was the main thing that I was responsible for
during the 40s there. And I worked Spent a lot of my
time working with seed growers throughout the
state that just started producing hybrid corn and
making it available. What were the important
steps in that program's success, as you look back
on it now? Well, are you familiar with the
procedure for developing hybrid corn? Or should I
outline it and just do it briefly? Well. Hybrid
corn is basically developed through the initial
creation of inbred lines, and these are obtained
by inbreeding a variety of corn. Dr. Mangelsdorf
had taken some of the local varieties that were
adapted to Texas here and had inbred them, that is,
self-pollinate them generation after
generation.
develop inbred line from that were adapted to
texas you couldn't just import corn from the
midwest and put it down here it wasn't adapted so he
had developed some lines adapted to texas and we
were just in the process of hybridizing these
lines to produce hybrid corn and to identify those
that produced the best hybrids and this process
continued on through the early 40s and we started
introducing hybrids in 41, 42, in the early 40
period there and worked with the seed growers. It
was a good deal of time and effort expanded in the
program throughout the state at that time. Where
geographically in Texas, where was the biggest
concentration of the early hybrid crops? I'd say
in the Blackland area. In 1940, there were five
believe it or not, five million acres of corn and
the average yield was 15 bushels per acre. Hardly
worth growing. And there was a lot of corn through
the Blackland area and even on East Texas and the
Gulf Coast and on even down toward Beville and that
area there. Well, most of the state except the, you
got west of, say, Lyon, Austin to Wichita Falls and
out west where the rainfall was low. Five million
acres representing quite important acres
throughout the state. And I'd like to get this in
there somewhere, and let me do it now if I may. One of
my important experiences was in working in the
corn improvement program. We utilized the
experiment substation in Texas. You're probably
familiar with some of them. But at that time, they
were located at West Lakeland Valley and Beeville
in the South of San Antonio area, Beaumont over in
East Texas, Temple in the Black Land. That was an
important location for us in the corn program. We
even had one in Nacogdoches over in East Texas. As
an interesting aside, it was set up in 1911, I
think, for tobacco improvement.